+++
date = "2017-09-03"
title = "So You've Decided to Incorporate Your Open Source Project"
description = "What is the difference between a corporation and an LLC, and why should a software developer care?"
categories = ["Big Picture"]
tags = ["Solus", "Ikey", "incorporation", "IRS", "SPI", "Debian", "Patreon"]
+++

Last month, [Solus](https://solus-project.com) founder [Ikey Doherty](https://github.com/ikeydoherty) announced plans to [formally incorporate the project](https://www.patreon.com/posts/another-limited-13660564) in his native Ireland. He noted that his main reasons for incorporating were to "provide employment for the ongoing contribution to Solus," and have a succession plan in place to ensure the project's continuity (i.e., if he's hit by a bus.)

Obviously, most open source projects start out as the work of one developer or a small group. Many never make any money or gain sufficient popularity to the point where incorporation is a viable option. So how do you know when your project has crossed that threshold? More to the point, what exactly does "incorporation" involve and how can it affect you and your project going forward?

## Is Your Project a Hobby or Business?

Before you reach the point of deciding whether to incorporate, first you need to look at whether your open source project is really a *business* or a *hobby*. After all, many developers have full-time jobs and pursue their projects during off-hours. Does accepting a handful of donations from users suddenly convert your work into a business?

Under the [Internal Revenue Code](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/183), an activity is presumed to be "for profit" if its gross income exceeds expenses for 3 of the past 5 years. So if you've been running an open source project for the past couple of years and all of your expenses--e.g., server costs, occasional payments to other developers--are paid out of your own pocket, then your activities are considered a hobby rather than a business.

However, this presumption can be outweighed by other factors. [IRS guidelines](https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/is-your-hobby-a-for-profit-endeavor) state an activity may still be classified as a for-profit activity if any or all of the following conditions are met:

+ Your time and effort indicate an "intention to make a profit" in the future;
+ You depend on the income generated by the activity;
+ Any financial losses you suffer because of the activity are "beyond your control" rather than expenses incidental to starting a business;
+ You have altered the "methods" of your project's operations to "improve profitability";
+ You possess the knowledge and skill to run your project carry "as a successful business";
+ You made a profit on "similar activities in the past"; and
+ You have made a profit during some years but not others.

In addition to these broad guidelines, if you have [more than $400 in net earnings](https://www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc554.html) from any self-employment activity, you must report that income on your individual tax return. This would include any money earned from donations to your open source project through platforms like PayPal or Patreon.

## Which Is Best: LLC or Corporation?

By default, if you are a sole developer running an open source project as a business, any income you earn must be reported on [Schedule C](https://www.irs.gov/forms-pubs/schedule-c-form-1040-profit-or-loss-from-business) of your federal income tax return (IRS Form 1040). In legal terms, you are a *sole proprietor*. This means there is no legal distinction between you and your business. Any income or losses from the project are treated as part of your taxable income--and you are also *personally* liable for any debts incurred as a result of the business.

For many small projects, there isn't likely to be much debt beyond development expenses. But if you're running a Linux distribution (like Solus) or develop software that may be involved in more complex licensing arrangements, you need to consider the potential for litigation that may arise from these business relationships. For instance, if you incorporate someone else's code into your project and the other developer sues you for alleged license violations--even if you know their claim is without merit--you may be held personally liable for any court judgment issued.

This is where organizing your project as a corporate entity can help protect you. Unlike a sole proprietor, a corporation or a limited liability company (LLC) has the legal capacity to "sue and be sued" in its own name. So should a legal dispute arise that involves your project, the business--and its assets--will remain separate from your personal property.

## LLCs Offer Flexibility, Personal Liability Protection

Now, I dropped the terms *corporation* and *LLC* without explaining the precise difference. They are not interchangeable. Each describes a separate type of legal entity governed by different rules and practices. Neither is inherently superior to the other, although I suspect in most cases, an open source project looking to organize would probably fare better as an LLC.

Why do I say this? For one thing, an LLC handles taxes in a more straightforward manner than a corporation. As I noted above, with a sole proprietor any net income is treated as part of the individual's personal tax return. The same is essentially true for an LLC. If you organize your project as an LLC, any income is still "passed through" and reported on your personal return. By default, the IRS "disregards" the LLC and taxes your income as if you were still a sole proprietor. At the same time, your LLC still provides you with protection against personal liability for any business debts.

In contrast, a corporation is taxed as a separate entity. In fact, it is effectively taxed twice. First, the corporation pays income taxes on its own net income. And then, if any profits are distributed to the shareholders--typically in the form of *dividends*--these individuals must report that income on their personal tax returns. Additionally, any income earned by individual employees of the corporation are subject to the normal withholding taxes.

An LLC can also be more flexible, and less of an administrative boondoggle, than a corporation. In a corporation, you have three distinct categories of stakeholders:

1. Shareholders, who hold the equity in the corporation;
2. Directors, who are chosen by the shareholders; and
3. Officers, who are appointed by the directors.

Now, in practice one person might fulfill all of these roles. But there's still a level of record-keeping involved that is probably unnecessary for a small, developer-led project. This is where an LLC can streamline things significantly. An LLC does not have shareholders or a board of directors; instead it has *members*. In the case of a one-member LLC, that person simply exercises control over the business.

## Partnerships & Multi-Member LLCs

But what if there is more than one person involved? Say three developers have been working on a project together. Up to this point, they've simply divided any income and expenses between them equally without bothering to adopt any formal structure. What are the legal consequences of this arrangement?

When there are multiple owners participating in an unincorporated business, you have what is known as a *general partnership*. The partners may have a written or oral agreement between them, but it is not legally necessary to form a partnership. By default, any income or debts incurred by the partnership is equally divided among the partners.

And this is where things can get tricky. Taking the above hypothetical, suppose one developer in a three-person partnership reuses code without checking its license, i.e. he assumes it's open source when it's really not. The owner of that code then files a copyright infringement lawsuit against the project--or more precisely, against all three of the developers. As a general partnership, the individual partners are subject to *joint and several liability*. In plain English, a court judgment incurred due to one partner's actions can be enforced, in its entirety, against the personal assets of the other two partners.

To avoid such an outcome, the three developers can form an LLC--with each of them as members--and sign an *operating agreement*, which is a binding contract spelling out how the business will be run. For instance, the operating agreement can state that all three members must agree to certain decisions, or restrict which members can enter into future contracts that bind the business. Perhaps just as importantly, the operating agreement can establish succession procedures in the event that one member wants to leave the project or unexpectedly dies.

## For-Profit and Non-Profit Corporations

There are two scenarios where a corporation might make more sense than an LLC for an open source project:

+  to raise capital from outside investors; or
+  to operate the project as a nonprofit organization.

The first scenario does not require much explanation. For-profit corporations are basically a mechanism for raising capital from multiple investors who play little, if any, role in the day-to-day operations of the business. Even if your project isn't anticipating a public offering anytime soon, a corporation can still be a useful structure for attracting venture capital or other passive investment.

At the other end of the spectrum, nonprofit corporations do not have shareholders at all. Most nonprofits are governed by a self-perpetuating board of directors--that is, the incumbent directors choose their successors. The board appoints an *executive director* or a similar officer to oversee daily operations.

There are some cases where a nonprofit corporation chooses to have  *members*, but this is not the same thing as membership of a limited liability company. Nonprofit members do not share in the ownership or income of the corporation, but they may have certain rights to participate in its governance.

For example, [Software in the Public Interest, Inc.](http://spi-inc.org/corporate/by-laws/) (SPI), a nonprofit corporation that provides financial support to [Debian](https://www.debian.org/) and other open source projects, operates under a membership system. The corporation's bylaws authorize both "contributing" and "non-contributing" members, allowing only the former to vote for the board of directors.

## The Complexity of Non-Profit Public Charities

As you can probably tell from the discussion of bylaws and directors, a nonprofit corporation is perhaps the most complex form of legal organization that an open source project can adopt. In addition to forming the corporation itself under state law, you also need to seek and receive *tax-exempt* status from the IRS. This part of the process can take several months to complete.

Although there are many types of tax-exempt nonprofits, organizations like SPI commonly seek recognition under [Section 501(c)(3)](https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/charitable-organizations/exempt-purposes-internal-revenue-code-section-501c3) of the Internal Revenue Code. This is a broad exemption category that applies to any organization operated for a "charitable, religious, educational, scientific, literary," or similar purpose, which can include promoting the development of open source software. A 501(c)(3) is classified as either a *public charity* or a *private foundation*. The latter refers to a nonprofit with a single major source of funding, usually a wealthy individual or family.

A public charity, in contrast, openly solicits contributions individual donors. Contributions to public charities are deductible from the taxable income of the donors. This provides an important incentive for donors, but it can also be a major logistical headache for the organization itself.

Consider a small open-source project that currently solicits donations through Patreon. As a sole proprietorship, or even an LLC, "donations" are simply treated as business income and reported on the individual owner's tax return. The business doesn't necessarily need to trace each individual contribution.

But if the project converts to a nonprofit corporation operating as a public charity, every donation must be strictly tracked. The donor must also receive a written acknowledgment from the nonprofit corporation for any contribution of at least $250 in order to receive their tax deduction. This applies not only to cash donations but any "in-kind" contributions of goods or services.

Of course, savvy open source developers can implement automated solutions to deal with these issues. But the infrastructure still needs to be in place. And that may be more than a small project wants to take on.

## Some Necessary Disclaimers

I have firsthand experience setting up LLCs for myself and others (in my capacity as a paralegal). But I am not an attorney and nothing in this post should be construed as legal advice. As Ikey Doherty did, you should always consult with a qualified attorney in your area before proceeding with any type of incorporation. Also, the discussion above is limited to incorporation laws in the United States. European Union countries like Ireland have their own incorporation laws and often use different nomenclature to describe certain types of entities.
